Add entry explaining the sap system and database split (#43)
trento-project/docs: adr/0011-sap-system-database-aggregate-split.md

# 11. SAP system and database aggregate split

Date: 2024-04-04

## Status

Accepted

## Context

> In the initial implementation of Trento, the SAP system and database states are stored in the same `sap_system.ex` aggregate. This makes the assumption that the relationship between a SAP system and a database is of 1 to 1, meaning that a database is only used by one SAP system. This is not an accurate description of the reality, as a database can handle multiple SAP systems in a multi-tenant environment.

Reviewer: Do we need the 'of' in the 1 to 1 sentence? 

> a database is of 1 to 1 ...

Maybe just 
> a database is 1 to 1 ...

Author: I don't know. For me both look correct. The one with `of` looks more accurate though

Reviewer 2: no actually Eugen is right, I think you're translating literally from Spanish (I guess because it would be similar in Italian) but in English you need to drop the "of".

> In the initial implementation of Trento, the SAP system and database states are stored in the same `sap_system.ex` aggregate. This is making the assumption that the relationship between a SAP system and a database is of 1 to 1, meaning that a database is only used by one SAP system. This is not an accurate description of the reality, as a database can handle multiple SAP systems in a multi-tenant environment.

Reviewer: What about 
> .. SAP system and a database is 1 to 1, meaning ..

instead of 

> .. SAP system and a database is **of** 1 to 1, meaning ..

In this scenario, when a multi-tenant database is discovered, it only can manage a unique SAP system and its application instances, making the multi-tenant scenario not supported.

> This must be reverted, as a multi-tenant scenario is pretty common, and many deployments have them.

Reviewer 2: We're not really reverting anything, since we don't have a previous state of things. :)

```suggestion
This limitation must be overcome, as a multi-tenant scenario is pretty common, and many deployments have them.
```

## Decision

> The currently existing `sap_system.ex` aggregate will be separated in 2, creating a new `database.ex` aggregate that will handle databases individually. This way, the lifecycle of a database is extracted from the SAP system one, making them independent. Having this, a new 1 to N relationship will be created between the database and SAP system aggregates (read models being more precise). Now on, the SAP system ID will be calculated combining the database ID and its tenant name, creating a new and unique ID for each SAP system.

Reviewer 3: Changed the style a bit and fixed two grammatical issues.
See if you prefer it.

```suggestion
The currently existing `sap_system.ex` aggregate will be split into seperate modules, creating a new `database.ex` aggregate that will handle databases individually. This way, the lifecycle of a database is extracted from the lifecycle of the SAP system, making them independent. Having this, a new 1 to N relationship will be created between the database and SAP system aggregates. Now the read models are more precise. From now on, the SAP system ID will be calculated by combining the database ID and its tenant name, creating a new and unique ID for each SAP system.
```

> The relationship between database and SAP systems will continue existing in many senses, and most of the related events will be handled by event handlers. For example, when a database is deregistered, or its health updated, these events will be listened, and once they happen, they will affect the SAP system aggregate via commands. At the end, both aggregates continue being pure, and connected through this kind of mechanisms.

Reviewer 3: > and most of the related events will be handled by event handlers.

Does this mean the messages will still be handled by the same event handlers, effectively sharing some handlers?

Author: Not really. It means that the logic behing this connection between SAP system and database that until that was handled in the SAP system aggregate, now if handled by event handlers.
At the end, when both were 1 aggregate, you can do everything in the aggregate code, but once they are different things, "external" side effect like event handlers are required

> The relationship between database and SAP systems will continue existing in many senses, and most of the related events will be handled by event handlers. For example, when a database is deregistered, or its health updated, these events will be listened, and once they happen, they will affect the SAP system aggregate via commands. At the end, both aggregates continue being pure, and connected through this kind of mechanisms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The relationship between database and SAP systems will continue existing in many senses, and most of the related events will be handled by event handlers. For example, when a database is deregistered, or its health updated, these events will be handled, and once they happen, they will affect the SAP system aggregate via commands. At the end, both aggregates continue being pure and connected through this kind of mechanism.
```

All of this forces us to handle previously existing events and aggregate roll-up snapshots, so most of the events related to a database will be upcasted. Besides this, some additional exceptions might arise, as SAP system and database don't share their ID anymore, but they did in the past, so previously stored data (as the deregistration process manager) must be taken into consideration.

> In order to deal with all of these old events, besides upcasting, we have considered a couple of options when old events and IDs are mixed up. Initially, [prefixing](https://hexdocs.pm/commanded/Commanded.Commands.Router.html#module-define-aggregate-identity) the `sap_system.ex` aggregate routing it with a `sap-system-` prefix looked a good option. It removes the issues you could have when SAP system commands with old IDs now belonging to databases are dispatched, as they are routed with the prefix together with the ID. We have discarded this option, as it converts the SAP system stream different from the others, and hides a bit what's going on in these scenarios. Instead of this solution, as the unique real scenario when this can happen is when the `DeregisterApplicationInstance` is dispatched by the deregistration process manager, we will just handle this particular command. The command will be enriched in a middleware protocol, so commands with IDs now belonging to databases will be ignored.

Reviewer 3: I'd reword and split this sentence into two, because it helps with readability of a complex scenario.

```suggestion
In order to deal with all of these old events, besides upcasting, we have considered a couple of options when old events and IDs are mixed up. Initially, [prefixing](https://hexdocs.pm/commanded/Commanded.Commands.Router.html#module-define-aggregate-identity) the `sap_system.ex` aggregate and routing it with a `sap-system-` prefix looked a good option. It removes issues that could arise when SAP system commands with old IDs, now belonging to databases, are dispatched, as they are routed with the prefix together with the ID. We have discarded this option, as it converts the SAP system stream different from the others, and hides a bit what's going on in these scenarios. We decided against this solution, as it realistically only occours when the `DeregisterApplicationInstance` is dispatched by the deregistration process manager. Therefore, we will just handle this particular command. The command will be enriched in a middleware protocol, so commands with IDs, now belonging to databases, will be ignored.
```

Author: So nice!

> In order to deal with all of these old events, besides upcasting, we have considered a couple of options when old events and IDs are mixed up. Initially, [prefixing](https://hexdocs.pm/commanded/Commanded.Commands.Router.html#module-define-aggregate-identity) the `sap_system.ex` aggregate routing it with a `sap-system-` prefix looked a good option. It removes the issues you could have when SAP system commands with old IDs now belonging to databases are dispatched, as they are routed with the prefix together with the ID. We have discarded this option, as it converts the SAP system stream different from the others, and hides a bit what's going on in these scenarios. Instead of this solution, as the unique real scenario when this can happen is when the `DeregisterApplicationInstance` is dispatched by the deregistration process manager, we will just handle this particular command. The command will be enriched in a middleware protocol, so commands with IDs now belonging to databases will be ignored.

Author: That we have discarded using the prefix option, because if we do that, and only do that for the sap system (and we cannot do it for the others, at least by now), the SAP system stream in the event store differs from the others on how it is used.
The other streams will continue being simple uuid strings, but the sap system becomes something like `sap-system-uuid...` which makes it uglier. And as most of the people are not aware about this prefixes and there is not any easy place to document it, so we would lose a bit of how it works.

> In order to deal with all of these old events, besides upcasting, we have considered a couple of options when old events and IDs are mixed up. Initially, [prefixing](https://hexdocs.pm/commanded/Commanded.Commands.Router.html#module-define-aggregate-identity) the `sap_system.ex` aggregate and routing it with a `sap-system-` prefix looked a good option. It removes issues that could arise when SAP system commands with old IDs, now belonging to databases, are dispatched, as they are routed with the prefix together with the ID. We have discarded this option, as it converts the SAP system stream different from the others, and hides a bit what's going on in these scenarios. We decided against this solution, as it realistically only occours when the `DeregisterApplicationInstance` is dispatched by the deregistration process manager. Therefore, we will just handle this particular command. The command will be enriched in a middleware protocol, so commands with IDs, now belonging to databases, will be ignored.

Reviewer: Did you mean different as an adjective? 

> as it converts the SAP system stream different from the others

This could sound nicer, what do you think ? 

> as it converts the SAP system stream **differently** from the others

Author: I meant that the SAP system stream would be different compared with the others

> In order to deal with all of these old events, besides upcasting, we have considered a couple of options when old events and IDs are mixed up. Initially, [prefixing](https://hexdocs.pm/commanded/Commanded.Commands.Router.html#module-define-aggregate-identity) the `sap_system.ex` aggregate and routing it with a `sap-system-` prefix looked a good option. It removes issues that could arise when SAP system commands with old IDs, now belonging to databases, are dispatched, as they are routed with the prefix together with the ID. We have discarded this option, as it converts the SAP system stream different from the others, and hides a bit what's going on in these scenarios. We decided against this solution, as it realistically only occours when the `DeregisterApplicationInstance` is dispatched by the deregistration process manager. Therefore, we will just handle this particular command. The command will be enriched in a middleware protocol, so commands with IDs, now belonging to databases, will be ignored.

Reviewer 2: FIFY
```suggestion
In order to deal with all of these old events, besides upcasting, we have considered a couple of options when old events and IDs are mixed up. Initially, [prefixing](https://hexdocs.pm/commanded/Commanded.Commands.Router.html#module-define-aggregate-identity) the `sap_system.ex` aggregate and routing it with a `sap-system-` prefix looked a good option. It removes issues that could arise when SAP system commands with old IDs, now belonging to databases, are dispatched, as they are routed with the prefix together with the ID. We have discarded this option, as it would make the SAP system event stream the only one different from the others, and it would hide a bit what's going on in these scenarios. We decided against this solution, as it realistically only occours when the `DeregisterApplicationInstance` is dispatched by the deregistration process manager. Therefore, we will just handle this particular command. The command will be enriched in a middleware protocol, so commands with IDs, now belonging to databases, will be ignored.
```
